---
layout: single 
title: "A critical layer model for turbulent pipe flow by Mckeon & Sharma"
---
# Note 

This is very much so a work in progress and will be continually updated as my understanding deepens.

# Outline

First, we start with a review of pertient background material the primary reference being [^1]. We will overview the resolvent analysis from the perspective of [^1] and then proceedwith the development of the resolvent analysis as presented in [^2].

# Preliminaries

## Pseudospectral Analysis

While we will be using [^1] as a primary reference, one is encouraged to explore [^3] for a more careful treatement of pseudospectra.

**Follow the motivation from [^3]. Motivate why we care about nonnormal operators**

When extending a theoretical tool, one must first ask: Why? Is there a necessary gap that this new theory fills? In the case of pseudospectral analysis, we are attempting to attack problems where spectral analysis fails, such as the analysis of non-normal operators. 

**Definition of normal and non-normal.**

**Why spectral analysis fails for non-normal.**

**What is the pseudospectrum and why does it work.**


This is all fine and good, but why do we care? It turns out that most fluid systems linearized about spatially nonuniform flows give rise to non-normal operators. Therefore, we must work with pseudospectral analysis if we intend to talk about some for of the "spectrum" within fluid flows. We now move on to how we will use the pseudospectrum in our analysis.


## Resolvent Analysis

**Include Definition of Resolvent from [^3]**

The resolvent (in Fluid Mechanics) is defined as the linear operator relating the input forcing (of a linear operator) to the output. For instance in the incompressible Navier-Stokes (N-S) equations, the output is a divergence-free velocity field and the input to the resolvent are the nonlinear terms of the equation, where the divergence free condition, $$ \nable \dot u = 0 $$ results from incompressiblity. In general, inputs may include general forcing terms and the output may be any observable. Unlike many other analysis methods, this analysis does **not** assume small pertubations, nor does it directly linearize the equations. This allows for a much more general analysis than other approaches afford.

**Talk about importance of the pesudospectral aspect of the resolvent analysis. Allows for analysis of nonnormal analysis, which are normal (haha) in fluid mechanics.**



# Development of the Resolvent analysis [^2]


The paper by McKeon & Sharma [^2] represents one of the foundational papers in applying the resolvent analysis to problems in fluid mechanics, as such it is of utmost importance to understand their formulation.

## Formulation

## Analysis

## Application in the field



#Conclusions

## Takeaway

## Future Steps


# Excerpts to Ponder

Herein are quotes from the various sources, which I found to be interesting and have non-trivial results. These are not intended to be obvious results and the hope is that one can sit with them and let them seep into the mind to enable a deeper understanding of the theory.
1. [^1]
> Although formally a tool for linear systems, a resolvent analysis can provide insights into coherent structures in turbulent flow by analyzing the response of the system associated with the linear resolvent operator formed using the turbulent mean flow. This is not necessarily equivalent to linearization because the nonlinear forcing is required to sustain an otherwise stable system.
>
> [^1] pg 4034
*
2. [^2]
*
*





# Testing mathjax support
$$

\begin{align}

\phi = \psi * \eta

\end{align}

$$









[^1]: Taira, K., Brunton, S. L., Dawson, S., Rowley, C. W., Colonius, T.and McKeon, B. J.,Schmidt, O. T., Gordeyev, S., Theofilis, V. & Ukeiley, L. S.2017 Modal analysis offluid flows: An overview.AIAA J.55(12), 4013–4041.
[^2]: McKEON, B., & SHARMA, A. (2010). A critical-layer framework for turbulent pipe flow. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 658, 336-382. doi:10.1017/S002211201000176X
[^3]: Spectra and Pseudospectra: Lloyd N. Trefethen and Mark Embree. The Behavior of Nonnormal Matricesand Operators. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 2005. xvii+606 pp. ISBN0-691-11946-5.

