---
layout: single 
title: "Choosing Values"
---
# Background

This topic came up with a discussion between myself and a fellow student. I was asked: 

> Do you have explicitly set values?

At first, this seems like a non-sensical question -- of course everyone has values, whether good or bad. But that is not what this question is asking. It is asking whether or not, we have values which are based upon an explicit logical framework. Is there a reason behind the values or do we have them because they are the *right* values to have.

Now in dissecting this questions, I think there are two major pathways in which one can explicitly set values. One could either have a view of what the objective truth of reality is and then they must have values in line with that , e.g. holding some view about salvation for example. The other pathway is that one should choose values based on what one thinks is *right* morally and then derives their objective reality model off those core values. Now one could make an argument that they may not choose any values or do not think about them, but I posit that this falls into the latter category.

I will speak about the first pathway and supporting methods for walking this path. Afterwards, I will proceed to discuss the second method. In full disclosure, my model is that of the first, with some caveats, so the second method will be sparse and conjecture. 

# The two paths

## Modeling Objective Reality

Rather than modeling objective reality, as implied by the topic heading, we actually must understand how phenomenon work or have some mental model for how phenomenon work. Why is this? In order to choose values, one must have some underlying idea about have their actions effect the phenomenal world. If our actions were to have no effect on the phenomenal world, then there would be no point in having values, unless it effected an unphenomenal world (e.g. an afterlife etc.). In the former framework, there is no reason to have values or to think about actions at all, besides maximizing pleasure, or some other metric for happiness. 

So, what are the options for modeling phenomenon and interactions? The Buddha proposes three mental models, which one may hold:

> “Monks, there are these three sectarian guilds that—when cross-examined, pressed for reasons, & rebuked by wise people—even though they may explain otherwise, remain stuck in (a doctrine of) inaction. Which three?
> 
> “There are contemplatives & brahmans who hold this teaching, hold this view: ‘Whatever a person experiences—pleasant, painful, or neither pleasant nor painful—is all caused by what was done in the past.’ There are contemplatives & brahmans who hold this teaching, hold this view: ‘Whatever a person experiences—pleasant, painful, or neither pleasant nor painful—is all caused by a supreme being’s act of creation.’ There are contemplatives & brahmans who hold this teaching, hold this view: ‘Whatever a person experiences—pleasant, painful, or neither pleasant nor painful—is all without cause & without condition.’
> 
> “Having approached the contemplatives & brahmans who hold that… ‘Whatever a person experiences… is all caused by what was done in the past,’ I said to them: ‘Is it true that you hold that… whatever a person experiences… is all caused by what was done in the past?’ Thus asked by me, they admitted, ‘Yes.’ Then I said to them, ‘Then in that case, a person is a killer of living beings because of what was done in the past. A person is a thief… unchaste… a liar… a divisive speaker… a harsh speaker… an idle chatterer… greedy… malicious… a holder of wrong views because of what was done in the past.’ When one falls back on what was done in the past as being essential, monks, there is no desire, no effort (at the thought), ‘This should be done. This shouldn’t be done.’ When one can’t pin down as a truth or reality what should & shouldn’t be done, one dwells bewildered & unprotected. One cannot righteously refer to oneself as a contemplative. This was my first righteous refutation of those contemplatives & brahmans who hold to such teachings, such views.
> 
> [The Buddha then uses the same arguments to refute those who hold tht whatever a person experiences is all caused by a supreme being’s act of creation and those who hold that whatever a person experiences is all without cause, without condition.]
> 
> “These are the three sectarian guilds that—when cross-examined, pressed for reasons, & rebuked by wise people—even though they may explain otherwise, remain stuck in inaction.”  -- [AN 3:62](https://www.dhammatalks.org/suttas/AN/AN3_62.html)

So we can see that the *Buddha* states that there are three general possibilities for phenomenal models:

1. Phenomenon are influence by neither the past nor present
2. Phenomenon are only influenced by the past
3. Phenomenon are influenced by both the past and present

In this *sutta* the *Buddha* explains the contradictions that follow, when one assumes the 1st or the 2nd phenomenal models. Instead of repeating those points, I would like to discuss why the 3rd model is the most beneficial one to work with.

Following from the choice of the 3rd model, there are two direct conclusions. The first follows from our past influencing phenomenon. This is stating that our current actions will affect future phenomenon -- what we are doing now will affect the mind at later mind-moments. This causal link is the very basis for *samsara*. What we do conditions our mind in the future. The second conclusion follows from our present influencing phenomenon. This points to there being a way to shape our current mind-state. Our ability to prevent ourselves from suffering in the present moment. If this second part was not here, then there would be no way to gain happiness or to avoid stress and suffering. So in this way, the 3rd model acknowledges the need for a value system, in terms of past actions influencing our future, and also states that there is a way to improve or to iterate on our value system to attain a more lasting form of happiness.

Now that we have discussed why we should "model reality" and a good basic framework to work with, we can now discuss how to actually model values, based off a model of reality. Following this section, we will assume the 3rd phenomenological model is taken.


## Modeling values

If we are first to choose values, we must ask: how?

1. How can we choose values?
- The trivial answer is to say that we choose *important* topics and then choose viewpoints on those. From there we may derive overall principles that are laid out. The trouble with this is that, what is *important*? 

In defining the *important* topics, we must base this importance on something. This in some sense is basing it on a mental model of how the world works -- modeling objective reality but not conciously. I argue that by not choosing the important topics in an explicit fashion, via a mental model, we are prone to falling into various bias'. As a corollary, we must ask what is the purpose of values? In that, what are we attempting to achieve? 

These topics are discussed in the Buddhist suttas:

> In arriving at their views, the Romantics used a standard that the Buddha called, “agreement through pondering views” (MN 95). In other words, according to this standard, truth can be found by comparing views and accepting those that make sense together—whether that sense is logically coherent or, in the case of Schlegel, cogent in a more ironic way. As the Buddha pointed out, however, the conclusions drawn by this method are sometimes true and sometimes not, so he refused to use this standard as his own standard for truth, as it was too irresponsible. A teacher who couldn’t speak responsibly on the issue of what is skillful or not, in his eyes, provides no true refuge to his listeners (§8). [^1]

Here-in, we see that the Buddha brings up the same qualms with choosing values. How are we to choose values ( or a standard) without a rigorous underpinning to know what is a skillfull and unskillfull action <sup>[2](#fn2)</sup>? Before answer this question, we must pose another one. Even under the assumption we may choose a logically coherent set of values, how are we to know what is the action, which leads most directly to the achievement of those values? I argue that this requires some phenomenological model. How do our actions effect the outcome? Do they have any effect? The Buddha speaks on this in terms of dependent origination (paṭiccasamuppāda). This topic is much to larger for this essay and a wonderful exposition is given in <sup>[3](#fn3)</sup>:

> “Bhāradvāja, first you went by conviction. Now you speak of unbroken tradition. There are five things that can turn out in two ways in the here & now. Which five? Conviction, liking, unbroken tradition, reasoning by analogy, & an agreement through pondering views. These are the five things that can turn out in two ways in the here & now. Now some things are firmly held in conviction and yet vain, empty, & false. Some things are not firmly held in conviction, and yet they are genuine, factual, & unmistaken. Some things are well-liked… truly an unbroken tradition… well-reasoned… Some things are well-pondered and yet vain, empty, & false. Some things are not well-pondered, and yet they are genuine, factual, & unmistaken. In these cases it isn’t proper for a observant person who safeguards the truth to come to a definite conclusion, ‘Only this is true; anything else is worthless.” [MN 95](https://www.dhammatalks.org/suttas/MN/MN95.html)

Herein the *Buddha* is expounding on the truth of a phenomenonological model, that one cannot know for certain that it is **absolutely** true. In this manner, he is pointing to the need for iteration in forming a mental model. That is, one must be *observant* and see whether an action leads to good or bad results. If an action leads to good results and it doesn't align with ones value system, the values must be changed. If an action leads to bad results and aligns with ones value system, the values must be changed. This in trun motivates the need for ardency, alertness, and mindfulness<sup>[4](#fn4)</sup>.


## Criticisms

A perceived flaw in the first approach is that one must conjecture about objective reality or have some inkling about it from experience. Indeed, if this is done incorrectly, one will just end up following some philosophical approach that sounds "good" to oneself. Now, what is the problem with just choosing what sounds correct, in both this case and in the choosing values case? 

Although typically in modern society we believe that we are not influenced by philosophies of the past, we can see throughout history and our cultural practices of today that we are greatly influenced by past philosophers. For instance, the influence of the German Romantics can be seen in the general teaching of Eastern religious traditions to Westerners <sup>[1](#fn1)</sup>. If one is to accept this, then we must say that in choose what sounds right, we are only choosing what falls in line with whatever philosophy is popular in that era. So in this way, one is not clarifying objective reality, but one is just clarifying the underlying assumptions they hold. This is good in-and-of itself, but it is not the point of this discussion

### Wrong mental models and the need for improvement

> “But to what extent, Master Gotama, is there the safeguarding of the truth? To what extent does one safeguard the truth? We ask Master Gotama about the safeguarding of the truth.”
> 
> “If a person has conviction, his statement, ‘This is my conviction,’ safeguards the truth. But he doesn’t yet come to the definite conclusion that ‘Only this is true; anything else is worthless.’ To this extent, Bhāradvāja, there is the safeguarding of the truth. To this extent one safeguards the truth. I describe this as the safeguarding of the truth. But it is not yet an awakening to the truth.
> 
> "If a person likes something… holds an unbroken tradition… has something reasoned through analogy… has something he agrees to, having pondered views, his statement, ‘This is what I agree to, having pondered views,’ safeguards the truth. But he doesn’t yet come to the definite conclusion that ‘Only this is true; anything else is worthless.’ To this extent, Bhāradvāja, there is the safeguarding of the truth. To this extent one safeguards the truth. I describe this as the safeguarding of the truth. But it is not yet an awakening to the truth.”

## Working with Buddhist Models

At this point, we may come to the conclusion that, from a Buddhist perspective, we must work with some mental model to form our values. Further, we must be vigilent in safeguarding the *truth* that we have seen, while not being fixed on the *truth* that has been seen. So now we must ask, how can we improve our mental model and how must we further refine our values to more accurately reflect the truth? One such Buddhist framework for this would be to remove the three poisons (*akusala-mūla*) of greed, anger, and delusion. In removing the three poisons, one will purify their views.

Now the underlying premise is the removing the *akusala-mūla* will lead to the ending of stress and suffering. If one is to accept this though, then they may know that their values are not pure when they see one of greed, anger, or delusion in their mind. In this way, we are lead to a method for refining values and we may avoid further "agreement through pondering views", as employed by the Romantics.


### Working with Critisms


# Conclusions

In order to be rigorous and concrete in what assumptions are being made, we must choose to develop values by means of attempting to see objective reality and walk in lines with what we perceive as the truth. Else, we may fall into traps of doing what is perceived to be *right*, which may only be defined by philsophical trends of the era. In terms of seeing reality, we must see it in terms of some factor, for Buddhists this is in terms of the three characteristics, *tilakkhaṇa*, and for Abrahamic religions it may be in terms of seeing God.

The key problem with this approach is that we must try to see reality as clearly as possible and there is room for mistake. In the attempts of seeing reality, we are actually developing our own philosophical model and choosing values that fall in line with that model. The benefit is that there is a constant feedback loop. In the Buddhist example, if one chooses a value that causes more stress and suffering (*dukkha*) then one knows that their view of reality is off in some manner. This method proves to be greatly more effort and includes many trials-and-tribulations, but in the end it results in a philosophical model and a set of values completely inline with what is seen by oneself.

# Quotes to ponder




# Appendix

## Why model Objective reality



<a name="fn1">1</a>:: *Buddhist* *Romanticism*, Thanissaro Bhikku. [Found here](https://www.dhammatalks.org/books/BuddhistRomanticism/Contents.html)
<a name="fn1">2</a>: Here skillfull is used to mean having skill with resepect to the end-goal. In the buddhist sense, a skillfull action would be one that leads to the ending of suffering.
<a name="fn1">3</a>: *The* *Shape* *of* *Suffering*, Thanissaro Bhikku. [Found here](https://www.dhammatalks.org/books/ShapeOfSuffering/Section0001.html) 
<a name="fn4">4</a>: *Ardent*, *Alert*, *&* *Mindful*, Thanissaro Bhikku. [Found here](https://www.dhammatalks.org/Archive/Writings/CrossIndexed/Published/Meditations7/120401Ardent,AlertAndMindful%20.pdf)
