---
layout: single 
title: "Paramis"
---

This is a reflection, a commentary if you will, on *Good Heart, Good Mind* by Thanissaro Bhikku [^1]. It is a transcription and further discussion of two ten day retreats he gave on the *Paramis* (the perfections). The reason for this post is that I have realized recently that the stress of everyday life -- of life in graduate school -- has begun to harden my heart and I have begun to act not purely out of kindness when interacting with others. Though this is likely not visible to the others, I have begun to feel the tension in my heart when interacting with this. To me, I see this as an inner sign that one must put more effort into their practice and watching their mind. So where do the *Paramis* fit into this? Let us start with the list of the *paramis* and the reasoning for them.

> Giving, virtue, renunciation, discernment, persistence, endurance, truth, determination, goodwill, and equanimity

> They (the *paramis*) show how to approach duties, responsibilities, and challenges in a way that’s conducive both to genuine goodness and to genuine happiness. As they develop, they foster qualities both of a good mind—wise in understanding cause and effect—and a good heart: purposeful, well-intentioned, and strong - Preface, *Good Heart, Good Mind*

So we may clearly see that the *paramis* directly apply to the situation that I have found myself in. They are a way of purifying our conduct and daily life and ensuring that we are acting in a way that leads up to our ultimate goal -- *dukkha-nirodha* (the ending of stress and suffering).

Now let us begin, we procced by going chapter by chapter and discussing quotes and adding reflections on top of those. These are meant to be a more succint guide for others to question in the same way I am. Moreover, they serve as a means to show my thought process and that no beings mind is perfect. I offer this to you as a vulnerability. I am not anywhere near perfect and I am simply another person attempting to walk the path to the ending of suffering.

Final note: This commentary will be slowly updated as I work through the book.

# Introduction


[^1]: [Good Heart, Good Mind by Thannisaro Bhikku](https://www.dhammatalks.org/books/GoodHeart/Contents.html)


