---
layout: single 
title: "A wish for non-becoming"
---

I have known for sometime that my mind is inclined towards dispassion for reality, a wish for non-becoming (*vibhava-tanha*). If I knew that reality was over when we died, that is *samsara* was not reality, then I would end it as soon as possible. The wish to not experience phenomenon is very strong, the aversion is strong. It's not that reality as a whole is not enjoyable, but even the enjoyable parts are unsatisfactory. When speaking to others, this viewpoint is typically a cry for someone to call psychiatric help, but from a Buddhist viewpoint I believe this is a very logical conclusion. A quality inherent to *samsara* is *samvega*, so rightfully translated

> The oppressive sense of shock, dismay, and alienation that come with realizing the futility and meaninglessness of life as it's normally lived; a chastening sense of our own complacency and foolishness in having let ourselves live so blindly; and an anxious sense of urgency in trying to find a way out of the meaningless cycle. *Thanissaro Bhikku*, "Affirming the Truths of the Heart: The Buddhist Teachings on Saṁvega and Pasāda",

# Another option

So in my daily life, the inclination of the mind is towards *vibhava-tanha*, especially when the mind is presented with pain of some kind. This reaction is a truly problematic one, as *samsara* continues whether we wish for it to occur or not. Moreover, by wishing for non-becoming, we conceptualize the pain we are feeling. By conceptualizing this pain, the feeling (*vedana*) of pain begins again through proliferations of the mind. Instead, if we are able to catch the mind in it's wish for non-becoming, we may be able to focus on the *vedana* themselves. By focusing on *vedana* in and of themselves, we see the transitory nature of phenomenon -- what rises, will cease. So, although there is pain, it need not proliferate and continue with the minds thoughts. Further, we are able to see that the feelings are just phenomenon, they have the quality of *anatta*. *Vedana* do not have any inherent control over the mind, they are simply phenomenon that arise and cease. By viewing pain in this way, we both limit the amount of pain that is caused and we begin to see the causal process underlying the pain. That is, we begin to see that nature of *samsara* -- *dukkha, anatta, anicca*.

I urge you to try to watch feelings in and of themselves. Watch how the mind proliferates and watch the nature of these phenomenon. There is a path to the reduction of pain we feel, if we are only able to put a little work in. 
