---
layout: single 
title: "Paramis"
---

This is a reflection, a commentary if you will, on *Good Heart, Good Mind* by Thanissaro Bhikku [^1]. It is a transcription and further discussion of two ten day retreats he gave on the *Paramis* (the perfections). The reason for this post is that I have realized recently that the stress of everyday life -- of life in graduate school -- has begun to harden my heart and I have begun to act not purely out of kindness when interacting with others. Though this is likely not visible to the others, I have begun to feel the tension in my heart when interacting with this. To me, I see this as an inner sign that one must put more effort into their practice and watching their mind. So where do the *Paramis* fit into this? Let us start with the list of the *paramis* and the reasoning for them.

> Giving, virtue, renunciation, discernment, persistence, endurance, truth, determination, goodwill, and equanimity

> They (the *paramis*) show how to approach duties, responsibilities, and challenges in a way that’s conducive both to genuine goodness and to genuine happiness. As they develop, they foster qualities both of a good mind—wise in understanding cause and effect—and a good heart: purposeful, well-intentioned, and strong - Preface, *Good Heart, Good Mind*

So we may clearly see that the *paramis* directly apply to the situation that I have found myself in. They are a way of purifying our conduct and daily life and ensuring that we are acting in a way that leads up to our ultimate goal -- *dukkha-nirodha* (the ending of stress and suffering).

Now let us begin, we proceed by going chapter by chapter and discussing quotes and adding reflections on top of those. These are meant to be a more succint guide for others to question in the same way I am. Moreover, they serve as a means to show my thought process and that no beings mind is perfect. I offer this to you as a vulnerability. I am not anywhere near perfect and I am simply another person attempting to walk the path to the ending of suffering.

Final note: This commentary will be slowly updated as I work through the book.

# Introduction

The first question we must consider is:

> How do we start with the paramis? Is it linear? Is it not?

It turns out that the Buddha did not lay out a clear progression and that using the framework of the *paramis* alone does not answer our question. Instead, Thanissaro choose to frame the paramis in terms of the four determinations, which are as follows

* Not to neglect discernment,
* To guard the truth,
* To be devoted to relinquishment, and
* To train for calmn.
* 
# Quotes to comment on

> The second point is that, as with every determination, all of the perfections grow from an act of will. This is in line with the Buddha’s observation that all phenomena are rooted in desire. We have to want the perfections for them to come true. They are qualities of the heart and mind that we can choose to develop consistently to pursue the goal we’ve chosen, which is awakening.

We may talk about the paradox of becoming and how we must desire for the path. This is developing skill in becoming. We may be able to reference another post we had.

> It’s important that we realize that we’re always making choices and that they matter. Awakening is not the inevitable result of our true nature, nor is it our entitlement. We have the potentials for the perfections in our hearts and minds, but we also have the potential for their opposites.

This is one of the cruxes of Thanissaros teachings. The path is a skill to be cultivated and this points to the haste and the necessity to be steadfast in ones practice.

> This is why, when we discuss the perfections, we will start each discussion by identifying the desire that underlies our determination to develop that perfection as part of our quest for awakening.

> This means that discernment has to begin with conviction. In other words, the teaching sounds good, it makes good sense, but you don’t really know how true it is until you’ve reaped the rewards of the path. That kind of confirmed knowledge comes only with the practice. And to practice the perfections, you have to be convinced that they’re at least worth a try. The proof of these teachings lies in developing them and enjoying the results they yield. That’s when you’ll see for yourself that by giving priority to the perfections—not only as you meditate, but also as you fulfill the duties in your daily life, in your family and at work—they really are beneficial to you and to the people around you.


>You have to keep in mind the desire that you want to develop these ten perfections, so that when you meet up with challenges in your life you remember to tell yourself, “This is nothing to get upset about. This is an opportunity to develop the perfections.” In fact, there’s a Thai saying: “No obstacles, no perfections.” Let that thought give you encouragement. Then, as you’ve been able to develop a perfection well in that situation, you hold that skill in mind for the next time you’re faced with a similar challenge.
> 
> Remember, too, that all of the perfections are a form of determination, and with every determination, you have to keep remembering it as contrary desires come up in the mind. It’s in this way that the development of the perfections is a form of mindfulness.

## Determination

We want to talk about how all *dhammas* are rooted in desire. We should read the sutta on *paticcasamutapada* and find a nice quote. Or possibly the dhammapada.

> Now, it’s true that desire can be a cause for suffering, but it can also function as part of the path to the end of suffering. Or to put it in different terms, there’s a type of discontent that causes suffering, but there’s also a type of discontent that motivates the path. The desire and discontent that motivate the path are the ones we’ll be focusing on this evening.






[^1]: [Good Heart, Good Mind by Thannisaro Bhikku](https://www.dhammatalks.org/books/GoodHeart/Contents.html)


